---
title: "Lending a Helpful Hand"
date: 2008-12-07
author: Trish
categories: [Published Articles]
---

# Lending a Helpful Hand

_Andrew’s Helpful Hands Touch Families of Children with Cancer_ _Winner of the New England Press Association (NEPA) Award Category: Human Interest Published in Bay State Parent Magazine_ Imagine that your two-year old is showing alarming symptoms of diarrhea and lethargy. Imagine your shock when he is diagnosed with leukemia so advanced, he must be admitted to the hospital immediately. Your life as you knew it stops and you are thrust into a world of medical terminology, treatment, and trauma. You want to do everything you can to help your son get better. But it’s not easy. You have another child who needs your attention, a job that won’t give you the time off you need, and bills that are spiraling out of control. You’re facing bankruptcy; your toddler is facing much worse. It’s unimaginable. That is, unless you’ve been there. Parents John and Zenaide (Zee) Swenson of Hudson, MA, have. When their youngest son Andrew was diagnosed with Acute Lymphatic Leukemia (ALL), they faced a disease they knew nothing about, and all-important decisions regarding treatment. “You’re not making good decisions, you’re making the best of the worst decisions, and you don’t even know if it’s the best,” says John. After five long years of chemotherapy, remission, relapse, a bone marrow transplant, and many more monumental struggles, Andrew lost his battle to leukemia on July 28, 2002, one day after his 7th birthday. Now through [Andrew’s Helpful Hands foundation](http://www.andrewshelpfulhands.com/), started by Zee’s brother John Sousa, the Swensons are committed to making sure other families don’t have to face both cancer and financial crisis at the same time. John Sousa remembers the helplessness he felt while watching Andrew suffer from Graft vs. Host Disease (GVHD), a complication from the bone marrow transplant. Andrew’s skin was burned, red and unbearably itchy. In an attempt to distract him, Zee had Andrew make “high five” handprints. Though it all, Andrew always thought of others. “Andrew wanted to help his friends. He said we should both start the foundation and that we would do it together. His wish and his dream was to help others so they would have a home to go back to,” says John. Andrew’s Helpful Hands was born, sealed with the tiny handprint of Andrew. Andrew’s handprint is now the foundation’s logo, a indelible reminder of how on little boy’s pain has made a profound impression on the lives of many. The mission and passion of Andrew’s Helpful Hands is to help local families of children in need of a bone marrow transplant. The foundation helps through financial assistance, emotional support, fundraising efforts, and more... all aimed at allowing the family to “focus on their child during recovery.” “Families need more than financial help... they need emotional help. They need someone who’s ‘been there.’ We know the anguish,” says Zee. The Swensons know first-hand the financial toll a catastrophic illness can take on families. The darkest hours of Andrew’s illness became even darker when John lost his job. The Swensons had to remortgage their home to help fund a bone marrow drive for Andrew. “Families have been crushed financially because the corporate world doesn’t give leniency. The hell they go through just dealing with the illness is incredible. To lose your home [in the midst of that] is just ridiculous,” says Zee. Since its inception four years ago, Andrew’s Helpful Hands has assisted nine families and their children in Massachusetts and Connecticut. They’d like to do even more. “Our organization is all volunteer. Every penny we make we turn right back into the families,” says Zee. The Shartiers of Gardner, Ma is one of those families. Bonnie Shartier’s teenaged son Danny was diagnosed with Leukemia in January 2002. Bonnie was battling breast cancer at the same time. She and her son received chemotherapy treatments in the same hospital. “That first year and a half he breezed through treatment,” remembers Bonnie. But in August 2003, he relapsed. The only course of treatment left was a bone marrow transplant. “Because he wasn’t in remission, his doctor said that he only had a 10% percent of getting through the transplant itself. He was a very sick kid when he went through transplant, “Bonnie recalls. “He made it through… almost to day 300.” Danny passed away November 23, 2004. He was 16 years old. “He amazed his doctors at every turn, remembers Bonnie. “Whatever the doctors said, he did it. He wanted to get back to school. He wanted to learn how to drive. Then he got sick from a lung infection. His immune system was weak. It was a rapidly moving infection. This poor kid. He went through so much. To have this happen… But then I look at it and say, we had an entire extra year with him because of the bone marrow transplant.” Because of the help Andrews Helpful Hands gave the Shartiers, Bonnie and her family were able to spend that last year focusing on Danny, rather than financial strain. Bonnie knows that the help they received “gave me more time to be with my son. I can never repay them for that.”
